---
layout: post
title:  "Ansible"
author: "Pushpinder"
date:   2021-12-29 14:47:09 +0000
tags: ["ansible", "automation"]
---

Inventory file: `/etc/ansible/hosts`

Run playbook: `ansible-playbook playbook_name.yaml`

Run Ad-Hoc: `ansible <group> -m <module_name> -u <username>`

**Basic Modules**

- `ansible.builtin.command`
- `ansible.builtin.shell`
- `ansible.builtin.copy`
- `ansible.builtin.file`
- `ansible.builting.user`
- `ansible.builtin.yum`
- `ansible.builtin.service`

Gather Facts: `ansible <group> -m ansible.builtin.setup`

Ansible uses Jinja2 templating to enable dynamic expressions and access to variables and facts. You can use templating with the template module. For example, you can create a template for a configuration file, then deploy that configuration file to multiple environments and supply the correct data (IP address, hostname, version) for each environment. You can also use templating in playbooks directly, by templating task names and more.

All templating happens on the Ansible controller **before** the task is sent and executed on the target machine.

Group variables are stored in a directory called `group_vars`. Syntax: `group_vars/<group_name>`

{% highlight YAML %}
- hosts: monitoring
  tasks: []
{% endhighlight %}

Configuration like above can be used to simply gather facts for the host without running anything.

Playbook runs in order from top to bottom. At a minimum, each play contains, target and task.

By default, Ansible executes each task in order, one at a time, against all machines matched by the host pattern. Each task executes a module with specific arguments. When a task has executed on all target machines, Ansible moves on to the next task. You can use [<span class="std std-ref">strategies</span>](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_strategies.html#playbooks-strategies) to change this default behavior. Within each play, Ansible applies the same task directives to all hosts. If a task fails on a host, Ansible takes that host out of the rotation for the rest of the playbook.

Most Ansible modules check whether the desired final state has already been achieved, and exit without performing any actions if that state has been achieved, so that repeating the task does not change the final state. Modules that behave this way are often called ‘idempotent.’

Should you want to invert the architecture of Ansible, so that nodes check in to a central location, instead of pushing configuration out to them, you can.

The `ansible-pull` is a small script that will checkout a repo of configuration instructions from git, and then run `ansible-playbook` against that content.

The [<span class="std std-ref">ansible-playbook</span>](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/cli/ansible-playbook.html#ansible-playbook) command offers several options for verification, including `--check`, `--diff`, `--list-hosts`, `--list-tasks`, and `--syntax-check`.

Group variables files and the `group_by` module work together to help Ansible execute across a range of operating systems and distributions that require different settings, packages, and tools. The `group_by` module creates a dynamic group of hosts matching certain criteria. This group does not need to be defined in the inventory file. This approach lets you execute different tasks on different operating systems or distributions. For example:

{% highlight YAML %}
---

 - name: talk to all hosts just so we can learn about them
   hosts: all
   tasks:
     - name: Classify hosts depending on their OS distribution
       group_by:
         key: os_{{ ansible_facts['distribution'] }}

 # now just on the CentOS hosts...

 - hosts: os_CentOS
   gather_facts: False
   tasks:
     - # tasks that only happen on CentOS go in this play
{% endhighlight %}

Ansible uses existing privilege escalation systems to execute tasks with root privileges or with another user’s permissions. Because this feature allows you to ‘become’ another user, different from the user that logged into the machine (remote user), we call it `become`. The `become` keyword uses existing privilege escalation tools like *sudo, su, pfexec, doas, pbrun, dzdo, ksu, runas, machinectl and others.*

You can set the directives that control `become` at the play or task level. You can override these by setting connection variables, which often differ from one host to another. These variables and directives are independent. For example, setting `become_user` does not set `become`. You can define different `become` options for each managed node or group. You can define these variables in inventory or use them as normal variables.