---
layout: post
title:  "Red Hat Certified System Administrator (EX200) - Exam Prep"
author: "Pushpinder"
date:   2021-03-12 11:45:21 +0000
tags: ["certification", "linux"]
---

## Input/Output Redirection

Input/Output Redirection: stdin is the keyboard, stdout is screen, stderr is reserved for error outputs.

&gt; stores stdout to a file, &gt;&gt; append stdout to a file

&lt; input redirection, example sort &lt; listing

sort &lt;list &gt;sortedlist

| output of one file into another

To redirect error, use 2&gt;

Redirect stderr to stdout 2&gt;&amp;1



## Using grep and Regular Expressions

grep finds matching patterns

-i - case insensitive, -r - recursive, -v - find instances where pattern does not match

-w - match on word instead of pattern

Regular expressions=&gt; ^ - match starting of line, $ - match expression at end of line, \\ - escape special character, \[ \] - match any of the enclosed characters or range, \[^ \] - match anything except enclosed.

. - single character, any value except EOL, \* - match zero or more of the preceding character or expression.

\\{x,y\\} - Match x -y occurences of the preceeding

\\{x\\} - match exactly x occurences of the preceding.

\\{x,\\} - match x or more occurrences of the preceeding.

Example use case - To output a config file without comments, empty lines, and indented comments, use grep with -v flag, and search for '^#', '^$' and '^ \*#', this will show everything except the lines matching the search expressions.



## Accessing Remote Systems with ssh

SSH - Secure Shell, open remote shell on another system over an encrypted connection

-l - specify user, or use @

by default ssh uses the currently logged in user to login to the remote session

-i - private key file

-F - configuration file

ssh client config - /etc/ssh/ssh\_config or ~/.ssh/config

in the ssh client config, individual host based settings can be set.

user config file overrides system wide config file

ssh-keygen - Generate key pair

private key is kept with the server you are connecting from, and the public key is kept with the server you are connecting to.

ssh-copy-id - copy public key to target server

private key permissions must only be 600

anytime you connect to a server, the server has it's own fingerprint, this prevents man in the middle attacks.

public keys are stored in authorized\_keys

known\_hosts stores the fingerprint

authconfig-gui /abrt-gui- installs x libraries for opening remote windows locally over ssh

X11 Forwarding - use ssh with -X flag to access remote gui windows locally

scp and sftp are ssh equivalent for file transfers



## Logging in and Switching Users

su - substitue user/switch user

su without any specified user defaults to root

su without any arguments starts an interactive shell. .bashrc is executed in all types of shells(interactive/login), the .bash\_profile only gets processed for login shells

bashrc and bash\_profile can be used to set up env variables/ commands.

to start a login shell use su - , or su --login

.bash\_logout - collection of commands that run when the user logs out.

.bash\_history - user command history

search command history using - Ctrl+r

run single command as a different user, su -c

unlike the su -c command, when a command is running using sudo, it asks for the user's password and not the root user's password.

this is useful for allowing some users specific access to things.



## Compressing and Decompressing Files

Compression - Encoding information in fewer bits than the original information. Archive - A file that is a collection of multiple files/directories that can be stored easier than it's components.

tar - tape Archive. tar creates an archive.

tar -xvf , tar -cvf

tar by default extracts in the current working directory.

gzip and bzip2 - they do essentially the same thing, however the compression algorithms used are different

compression may also end up increasing the size of a compressed file, for example, if a file contains all random data, compressing that file will only add additional metadata increasing it's final size.

gzip and bzip have different levels of compression.

gzip default compression level is 6

for example, to compress using gzip level 9, gzip -9 filename

the file name extension doesn't really matter, but is helpful for identification purposes.

zip/unzip can also be used in Linux

to zip directory, the -r flag is required to compress recrusively.



## Creating and Manipulating Files

A file name is just a pointer to an inode that lives on a disk. The inode contains information about the data such as file name, location, and other metadata.

Renaming/Moving the file leaves the file inode unaffected.

When editing files with vim, it changes the inode number of the file, because the way vim edits files is by creating a temporary file, and upon saving it removes the original file and saves the temporary file with the original file name.

find =&gt; -type - f, d, l. -user

locate is much faster version of find but less precise.

less command has all of functionality of the more command plus additional features

head/tail default count is 10



## Linking Files

Hard Link - Link between files that point to the same inode. These cannot cross filesystems. Editing one of the files will automatically edit the other as both are pointing to the same object on the disk, but removing one will not remove the other as there is still one entry left for the inode.

Soft link - This is like a redirect, where there's not an actual file at the link location but just a link that points to the original file. Removing the original file doesn't remove the symlink, however the symlink points at nothing then.

symlinks point to file names, hard links work at the inode level.



## File Permissions

The file permissions having a special character such as . or + means the file has extended permissions, which can be in the selinux context or ACLs.

SUID and SGID - when a file's user permissions bit, it meant that the SUID bit has been sit, the SUID bit means that the effective UID of theprocess is set to that of the file ownwer. The SUID bit doesn't work on a script that starts with the shebang line. The same follows for SGID, when the 's' bit is set in the group permissions, the effective GID of the process is that of the group owner.

drwxrwxrwt - Sitcky bit is set, anyone can write here but only the owner can delete the files with the sticky bit.

chmod - Change Permissions.

chown - Change owner/group owner.

chmod 4555 - Set SUID, chmod 2555 - Set GUID

Set GUID on a directory - chmod g+s



## File Permissions: umask

umask sets the default permissions mask. Default file permissions - 666, Default Directory permissions - 777

by masking we can hide permissions from the default view.

Directories need the execute bit so a user can navigate into the directory.

umask is not persistent, it can be set for a specific task in a script or the user's profile.

System Account UID range - 0-199

Set system-wide user umask in /etc/profile

/etc/bashrc sets for non-login shells.



## Using System Documentation

Command help - commandname --help, or also -h, -?, or can try passing an invalid flag.

whatis searches the pattern in the title of the man page

apropos - search the pattern in the description of man pages.

whatis - view man page details if you are not sure what the name of the program you need help with is.

documentation is also located at /usr/share/doc for many packages.

the docs at /usr/share/doc location may also contain configuration examples



## Managing the Boot Process

Boot Process - BIOS/UEFI --&gt;Grub2--&gt;Kernel. Grub knows where on the disk the beginnning of the OS is. GRUB presents a list of kernels that are present for boot. Grub can be specified to boot into a non-configured kernel or to change the boot options of the configured kernels.

grub commands:

ls - view system drives, insmod lvm - instruct grub to handle lvm, search.file /grub2/grub.cfg- searches through available partitions to see which partition has the file. cat (hd0.msdos1)/grub2/grub.cfg - outputs the file

systemd Boot Targets:

rd.break - breaks to an interactive shell while in initrd allowing interaction before the system disk is mounted. emergency - similar to rd.break but mounts the system disk, rescue - equivalent to single user mode, where some services are started and disks mounted.

Example use case - To change the root password, when system boots, press 'e' to edit the boot parameters, and to the line that begins with linux, add rd.break, upon restarting the system it will go into emergency mode, there, mount the system disk as rw, using, mount -o rw.remount /sysroot, then chroort /sysroot, passwd. exit from chroot and mount as read only, then restart the system. If SELinux is enabled, the autorelabel needs to be initiated as SELinux is not loaded in the rd.break mode, and the password change requires changes to the contexts that SELinux manages.

touch /.autorelabel

The emergency and rescue mode prompt for root password.

emergency mode mounts the system disk but in this case some services are not started.

The difference between emergency and rescue is that every disk is mounted in rescue mode and some additional services are started.



## Managing Individual Processes

top - output continually updating list of process commands, IDs, and other information.

ps - reports a snapshot of the current processes.

ps accepts different types of options, with -, with --, and without any dashes.

ps aux is different than ps -aux

ps aux - all users, all processes and all terminals. filters in a user format

ps -aux - information for user named x, however gives similar information to ps aux.

pgrep - tools that combines ps and grep. -l - show process name, -u - Limited the matches to the user, -v - invert the results.

Kill Signals - SIGTERM - exit cleanly, SIGKILL, stop immediately, prevents cleanup, SIGHUP - Signal Hangup, stops processes in shell environment, can make some services re-read config. files, SIGINT - same as Ctrl+C

Kill Signals are inter process communication that are sent to programs to make them do specific things.

kill -l --&gt; List available kill signals and signal code. the signal code can then be used with command to run a specific signal.

SIGSTOP - pause process so it can be started alter, SIGCONT - Start a process that was paused with SIGSTOP or SIGTSTP, SIGTSTP - (Terminal Stop), Ask process to stop, this is similar to Ctrl+Z

The priority a given process is assigned is it's 'Nice Level'.

ps axo pid,comm,nice

Nice levels range from -20 to 19, with -20 the highest priority.

default nice level is 0.

renice -n -20 6053 --&gt; assign new nice level to process id 6053

w - list system users, and also the load average. the load average is an average overtime of threads that are running or waiting for resources over a specific period of time. 1m, 5m, 15m, intervals.



## Logging

most logs are writtern to /var/log, and what is written there is partially controlled by rsyslog. /etc/rsyslog.conf shows what services log where.

rsyslog can pull in logs from other servers or send logs to other servers.

logrotate automatically rotates logs based of configurable settings. /etc/logrotate.conf

systemd also keeps logs in a binary, searchable format, be default it is not persistent across reboots, but that can be changed.

mkdir /var/log/journal; chgrp systemd-journal /var/log/journal; chmod 2775 /var/log/journal; systemctl restart systemd-journal

Journalctl is more powerful than text based logs. journalctl -p err --&gt; show every error for every service, journalctl -p err -since yesterday, journalctl \_UID=1000

man syslog to view different log levels



## Virtual Machines

Virtual Host visualizes the hardware to run multiple guests, while a container visualizes the OS to run multiple workloads.

On RHEL, the packages that need to be installed for virtualization are: qemu-kvm, python-virtinst, libvirt, libvirt-python, virt-manager, libguestfs-tools, virt-install, qemu-img, libvirt-client

systemctl enable libvirtd; systemctl start libvirtd. libvirtd is the service for VMs

virt-manager - GUI for VM management.

virt-install - install VM from command line

virt-install --name vm1 --ram 1024 --disk path=/var/lib/libvirt/images/myvm.qcow2,size=8 --vcpus 1 --os-type linux --network bridge=virbr0 --location /tmp/centos.iso --extra-args 'console=ttys0'

In RHEL, domain means VM guest.

virsh - manually edit virtual machines.

virsh help, virsh list, virsh list --all, virsh destroy - turns off VM, virsh start, virsh suspend/resume, virsh undefine - delete VM, virsh edit - edit VM configuration, virsh autostart - set VM to autostart.

virsh console - text-based console to VM



## Service Manipulation

A network service is any service that relies on the network to run.

When a service is enabled, it creates a symlink in the directory /etc/systemd/system/mult-user.target.wants/



## Transferring Files

scp runs over ssh.

scp -r --&gt; recursive directory copying.

If you are running an ssh server, you are also running an SFTP server by default.

sftp user@host



## LVM

A logical volume sits inside a volume group, and that volume grap can span multiple physical volumes.

Volume group can contain multiple logical volumes.

When a physical disk is set up for LVM, metadata is written at the beginning of the disk for normal usage and the end of the disk for backup usage.

pvcreate - create physical volume from multiple devices.

vgcreate vgname /pv/location, create Volume group and add physical volume members. -s --&gt; set physical extent size. as of LVM2 it only affects the usage of LVM tools.

lvcreate -L 100m vgname, -n --&gt; Set LV name. -l --&gt; use extents instead of size.



## Manipulating Partitions

MBR partitions can only hold 4 primary partitions and can only address up to about 2TB of disk space.

fdisk sequence --&gt; n, t, p, w

partprobe - update new partition information.

gdisk - manipulate GPT partition tables.

82- Linux Swap 83 - Linux 84 - LVM, in GPT 8200 - Linux Swap 8300 - Linux 8e00 - LVM

After creating the partitions --&gt; Format the disk with filesystem, mkfs.xfs, create mountpoint, mount the disk, add entry to fstab if needed.

Always use the UUID to mount disk in fstab as the device name may change upon restart.

blkid - view UUID for device.

UUID= / xfs defaults 0 0



## Managing Mounted Disks

Use xfs\_admin to manipulate XFS filesystem. -L - set filesystem label, -l - display filesystem label, U - regenrate UUID, xfs\_admin -U nil /dev/xvdb1, xfs\_admin -U restore /dev/xvdb1, xfs\_admin -U generate /dev/xvdb1

By default the XFS filesystem has a block of data called super block that keeps information about free space and inodes. When high filesystem operations are performed, it may slow down the operation as the filesystem has to check with the super block to get the latest filesytem details. To deal with this, the lazy counters can be disabled, which will cause the super block to not be updated. xfs\_admin -c --&gt; enable/disable lazy counters.

tune2fs - manage ext4 partition. similar flags as xfs\_admin.

tune2fs -U random /dev/xvdb2 -&gt; generate random UUID.

Unlike xfs\_admin, tune2fs cannot restore the partitions original UUID.

/etc/fstab - DeviceID MountPoint FSType MountOptions

Mount Options - defaults (rw,suid,dev,exec,auto,nouser, and async), noauto,user,owner,nofail or filesystem specific options

Last 2 numbers in fstab line - dump frequency - Used for the dump command(backups) and FS check order(1 for root disk, 2 for any other if required, 0 is often used, 0 skips filesystem check).

To use disk label in /etc/fstab use LABEL="labelname"

moun -a - process fstab and mount anything that is not mounted.



## Network File Systems

NFS - Network File System, server exports a directory to any number of clients

mkdir /nfs; chmod 777 /nfs

in /etc/exports --&gt; /nfs \*(rw)

Mount Options --&gt; rw, ro, no\_root\_squash.

systemctl start {rpcbind,nfs-server,rpc-statd,nfs-idmapd}

exportfs -a; showmount -e localhost

On the Client:

systemctl start rpcbind

all the tools are part of nfs-utils

showmount -e ip\_addr

mount -t nfs ip\_addr:/nfs /mnt/nfs

By default root\_squash is on, which by default squashes any root writes to nfsnobody from a client.

SMB/cifs - yum install samba. Configuration in /etc/samba/smb.conf

mkdir smb; chmod 777 /smb

in /etc/samba/smb.conf

##share

browseable = yes

path= /smb

writeable = yes

useradd shareuser; smbpasswd -a shareuser

systemctl start smb

On the Client:

yum install cifs-utils samba-client

mount -t cifs //ip\_addr/share /mnt/smb -o username=shareuser,password=123456

The files created are owned by the username specified in the mount.



## File Permissions: ACLs

ACLs allow a much more granular permissions structure as opposed to normal ugo octal permissions.

If a file's permissions contains a dot it means there are extended permissions on the file, most of the time these are in the SELinux context. If a file permission contain a plus sign it means that ACLs are assigned to the file.

getfacl - read filesystem ACLs

setfacl - modify or set ACLs on a file or directory.

Example, setfacl -m g:groupname:rwx dir1/

Creating ACLs also adds a mask entry, which gives the effective permission, any time file permissions are changed, it changes the mask.

setfacl -x --&gt; remove the specified group/user permissions.

setfacl -b --&gt; remove the ACL.

for assigning ACL to everything in a directory, use -R with setfacl to do it recursively.

set default ACL on a directory so that whenenver new files are created they get the ACL applied --&gt; setfacl -d -m g:group:rwx dir1/

setfacl --remove-default dir

setfacl -k dir --&gt; Remove defaults

if a directory has been assigned default ACLs, then any sub-directories created will inherit the same attributes.

To copy a file's ACL to another, getfacl file1 | setfacl --set-file =- file2



## Network Configuration

nmcli - network manager's command line interface

Install bash-completion to setup environment

nmcli dev status - shows device status

the directory /sys/class/net list the ethernet devices

nmcli connection show - shows connections that network manager is aware of

network configuration in RHEL in /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/

nmcli help

nmcli conn add con-name connection\_name type ethernet ifname eth1 ---&gt; creates a new named connection for the device.

One interface can have multiple connections.

autoconnect is by default set to on

activate interface - nmcli con up connection\_name

nmcli con show --active

When an interface is added with nmcli it's added with DHCP on

nmcli con add con-name conn\_name autoconnect no type ethernet ifname et1 ip4 10.0.0.2 gw4 10.0.0.1

The above will create a new connection with static address.

nmcli con modify conn\_name connection.autoconnect yes --&gt; modifies autoconnect property.

when nmcli is used to modify network connections it creates the network file in the network-scripts folder

To delete a connection first shutdown the interface

ip - changes made with this command are commonly not persistent unlike nmcli

ip neigh - shows ARP table. ip link set if\_name up

create IP address for interface using ip command - ip addr add 10.0.0.2 dev eth0

To set DNS using nmcli - nmcli con mod conn\_name ipv4.dns IP.OF.DNS.SERVER

active DNS servers can be found in /etc/resolv.conf

ip addr del 10.0.0.2 dev eth0

changes made using nmcli are activated only upon the network is restarted

to add multiple dns entries using nmcli use the flag +ipv4.dns=

/etc/nsswitch.conf - order of DNS resolution

/etc/hosts - local DNS entries.



## Network Time Protocol

timedatectl - Manage time settings

\- set-time, set-timezone, set-ntp

tzselect - Selects time zone according to location.

tzselect is not persistent.

If NTP is enabled, it will not allow to run the set-time command in timedatectl

chrony manages NTP

chronyc tracking

chronyc sources -v

When NTP queries the current time from the upstream server, if the time difference is huge, it directly changes the time on the server, if the time different is very small, NTP skews the clock, which means that it changes the value of 1 second and uses this to then adjust the clock.

Stratum is how far away an actual time source the NTP server is. Stratum 1 is the closest to the actual clock source, Stratum 2 is connected to Stratum 1.

To change NTP pools being used, modify /etc/chrony.conf

iburst flag with the NTP server in chrony.conf means the service sends a bunch of packets to get an idea of the current time, and after it sends fewer packets to determine if the current clock is in sync.



## Scheduling Tasks

chage -l root --&gt; Displays user password information

For running scheduled tasks, first make sure that the user which will be used doesn't require a password change as seen in the chage command.

at --&gt; scheduler for specific jobs. example, at 12:00am, at now +1 minute

To deny users from running the at command --&gt; add the username to /etc/at.deny

to deny everyone aside from specific users and root --&gt; add the names to be allowed to /etc/at.deny

atq - at Job details.

To remove an at job --&gt; atrm job\_no

at -c job\_id --&gt; shows what the job is going to do.

To use cron the computer must be powered on , unlike at which will run the command which was missed due to the server being off, as soon as the server powers on

To run command every 5 minutes use \*/5

edit a user's crontab - crontab -e -u username

can also give a range in cron, for example to run command every five minutes between 3P and 7P and on specific days--&gt; \*/ 10 15-19 \* \* 2,3,5,6 echo Hi

/etc/cron.deny , /etc/cron.allow

cron jobs in the cron.d directory need to contain the username to be used for running the cron job

anacron runs every hour to see if a job has passed its threshold, it identifies if a job was missed and then runs it.



## Modifying the System Bootloader

Modifying the bootloader means booting into a different kernel then the one currently running.

view available kernels - yum list kernel

rpm -qa | grep kernel-\[0-9\]

yum checks the configured repositories to check what's available. rpm -qa only queries the local packages.

grubby --info=ALL --&gt; shows what is configured in the grub configuration file to boot from.

grubby --default-index --&gt; to identify the index of the running kernel

grubby --set-default-index index\_id --&gt; changes the index

grub2-set-default --&gt; changes the default index same as above.

Upon changing the default index, when the system is rebooted, it now boots to the kernel at the new default index.

kernel indexes do not change until a new kernel is installed.

grubby --set-default --&gt; to set the default kernel using the vmlinux filename instead of the index.



## Updating and Installing Packages

rpm - historically how software is installed on Red Had Servers.

i - install, h - give progress information, v - verbose, U - Upgrade a package, e - Erase/Remove a package.

rpm doesn't automatically resolve missing dependencies

nodeps - ignore dependencies, force - ignore errors, however this shall not be used at all unless you are sure about what you are doing.

yum - uses network software repositories.

yum install, yum repolist, yum remove, yum search.

yum can install from the repositories or from a rpm package by automatically resolving it's dependencies.

yum can also install directly from a web address.

the direcotry /etc/yum.repos.d/ contains repository configuration

packages can be excluded from repo file by using exclude=



## Using LDAP for Authentication

LDAP is a protocol that allows quick transfer of user information from a central point of authority to any number of clients. Users can be configured in one place and the user information can be used throughout the environment.

Microsoft AD is a directory service that can talk to LDAP.

OpenLDAP is the LDAP directory service.

LDAP setup requires package installation and then setting up authconfig.

yum install nss-pam-ldapd pam\_krb5 autofs nfs-utils openldap-clients

authconfig --enableldap --enableldapauth --enablemkhomedir --enableldaptls --ldaploadcacert=ca\_location.pem --ldapserver=ldap.linuxacademy.com --ldapbasedn="dc=linuxacademy,dc=com" --update

to just test the configuration, instead of update, use --test

to do the configuratoin from gui ==&gt; yum install authconfig-gtk

run authconfig-gtk as the user account and not the root

The above is for the LDAP client setup on a server. It will search the LDAP directory on the specified ldapserver.

realmd - Allows a RHEL server to join an Active Directory domain.

realm discover &lt;AD server&gt;

realm join &lt;AD server&gt;



## Manipulating User Accounts

id, getent, /etc /passwd, /etc/shadow, /etc/group

getent is useful when user information for a user is stored on an external source such as LDAP.

usermod: c- modify comment fielf, d - change home directory, often used with m flag which moves files to the new directory, G - add supplemental group, used with the a flag which appends rather than replace, L,U - lock and unlock the accoutn

locking the user inserts an exclamation mark in front of the encrypted password in the /etc/shadow file.

/etc/skel - directory contains the files that are automatically copied to the user's home directory upon creation.

/etc/default/useradd - contains the defaults for the useradd command on Red Hat systems.

/etc/login.defs

useradd: c- comment, d - home directory, g - set GID, G - supplemental groups, k - skeleton directory, p - set encrypted password, r - system account, s - login shell, u - set UID.



## Password Management and Aging

Things to look when configuring password requirements: -expiration/longevity of a password, - complexity of the password.

chage - change the password expiry information, d - set number of days, 0 will force password reset. M - Maximum days password will be valid for, I - number of days of inactivity after expiration before locking the account. -l - list current password settings for a user account.

having the password expired means the user will have to change the password upon next login, however it doesn't lock the account by itself.

chage - E --&gt; Set an account expiry date, regardless of the password inactivity settings

W - set the no. of days before expiration to send the warning to user.

/etc/default/useradd - set inactivity and expiration settings.

/etc/login.defs - password aging and length settings.

Password complexity is enforces using the module - pam\_pwquality



## Managing Groups

groupadd - create group, g - specify GID

usermod: -g - change user's primary group, G- add supplemental group.

When a user creates a file, the file is created with the permissions of the user's primary group ID&gt;

groupmod - modify group, -g - change Group ID, -n - change name of group.

changing a groups ID doesn't update the group ID on the directory owned by that group, as that group's owner is still pointing to old group ID. to reflect the change upon modifying a group ID, the owner group must be changed on the file.



## Configuring the Firewall

Netfilter is the piece of software in the kernel that handles firewall interactions.

firewall-cmd and firewalld are user-space tools to interact with netfilter.

iptables was the older way to manage netfilter. It's still functional, but not as user friendly as firewalld.

firewalld - service, firewall-cmd - configuration tool.

yum install firewalld firewall-config

Firewalld persistence - two different areas, runtime and persistence. making a runtime change takes effect immediately but doesn't persist across reboots, and opposite for persistent changes which don not take effect immediately however persist reboots.

firewalld comes with multiple zones. A zone is a convenient grouping of rules and things to apply those rules to.

firewall-cmd --get-zones --&gt; get list of all zones.

firewall-cmd --get-default-zone --&gt; default zone for the network.

for example, you are connecting to different networks, you can activate different zones for different networks.

firewall-cmd --list-all --zone=public

if no zone is specified it will list the default zone.

firewall-cmd --add-service=http --&gt; this will add the http service to the default zone.

instead of using the service name, a port can also be used.

firewall-cmd --add-port=80/tcp --permanent -- this will allow port 80 persistently however it will not be effective immediately, to activate do firewall-cmd --reload

firewall-cmd --zone=home -add-port=80/tcp

firewall-cmd --add-source=192.168.0.0/24

to run the GUI - firewall-config



## SELinux

SELinux (Security Enhanced Linux) - set of rules that defined what process can have access to what files/sockets on a system. It does that by labeling every file, port and socket with a context.

SELinux modes: Enforcing - denials happen and things are logged, Permissive - This mode warns when a rule is hit, logs it, but allows access that would normally be denied.

getenforce

setenforce 0 - set to permissive, setenforce 1 - set to enforcing.

SELinux disabled mode disables all the functionality of SELinux, This must not be practiced in a production environment

Disabled mode requires a reboot.

For example, if there's a vulnerability in the HTTP program, SELinux will restrict the apache program from accessing system files like /etc/passwd, as the context's wont align.

A boolean is a conditional rule that allows runtime modification of the security policy without having to load a new policy.

For example, to enable/disable cgi scripts in https, first it will require change in the httpd configuration, and then in SELinux.

getsebool https\_enable\_cgi - gets the current boolean value for https cgi enablement.

setsebool httpd\_enable\_cgi off|on - enables disables https cgi scripts in SELinux. To make the change persistent, use -P.

getsebool -a --&gt; list all se booleans.

every file, port, socket has an SELinux context.

ls -lZ --&gt; display security context.

semanage fcontext -l --&gt; view all SELinux contexts

To see what context a given process is running as --&gt; ps auxZ | grep httpd --&gt; this will list the httpd process and it's context.

the context of a file can be changed by using chcon -t, for example the default documentroot for httpd is changed, the new files won't work till the files are added to the same context as httpd, to check that verify the context on the original document directory, and then use chcon -t to assign the same context to the new directory.

The above is only effective on a single file and therefore to have the new context automatically applied to newly created files, use semanage fcontext -a -t httpd\_sys\_content\_t '/content(/.\*)?' ; restorecon -R /content

the above will make sure that any new files created under /content have the specified context.

To signal SELinux autorelable --&gt; touch /.autorelabel. this will re-label the whole filesystem.

Troubleshoot SELinux issues -- &gt; setroubleshoot-server

default SELinux log file --&gt; /var/log/audit/audit.log

sealert --&gt; best way to troubleshoot SELinux issues, part of setroubleshoot-server. This scans the SELinux log file and then presents a user readable format of the error and possible solutions.

example, sealert -a /var/log/audit/audit.log

however, the solution defined by sealert may not be the absolute best, as it may suggest doing extra steps which may not be required at all.