---
layout: post
title:  "Python"
author: "Pushpinder"
date:   2021-05-21 18:39:29 +0000
tags: ["scripting", "automation"]
---

## Variables
{% highlight python %}
character_name="Jatt"
character_age="30"
print("Name is "+character_name)
print("age is "+character_age)
{% endhighlight %}

Variables can be modified at any time in the code.

A variables value in quotes creates it as a string.

Number can be stored without quotes, for eg. var1 = 20

Boolean Value - True/False, eg. is\_male = False

## Strings

\\n - insert new line in print

\\" - Escape character, prints quotation mark.

\\\\- Escapes the backslash

phrase = "Bal"

print(phrase)

Concatenation --&gt; print(phrase + " is nice")

### Functions

Function is a block of code that performs a specific operation.

lower() - convert string to lowercase, print(phrase.lower())

upper()

isupper() - Check if entirely uppercase.

islower()

Example - print(phrase.upper().isupper()) runs the upper function on phrase, then runs the isupper function which will always return true in this case.

Functions can be run one after another, just as above.

len() - Find the length, example, print(len(phrase), this prints the length returned by the len function for the value in phrase.

Strings get indexed starting from 0, which means the first character in a string is at position 0.

phrase\[0\] - Get the character at position 0 in the variable phrase. **Square brackets** return the value stored at the specified position.

index() - Find where a character is located in a string. Returns the position. Character to be searched is passed as a parameter. Example, print(phrase.index("a"))

replace() - Accepts two parameters, replaces a value with the given parameter. Example. phrase.replace("Giraffe", "Elephant")

## Numbers

Python can handle integers and decimal numbers. Addition, subtraction, division and multiplication can be done.

In Python, for mathematic operations, parenthesis can be used to specify the order of operation.

Operators --&gt; +, -, \*, /, % %(modulus) returns the remainder.

To print numbers with strings, they must first be converted to string data type.

str() - convert to string. example,

{% highlight python %}
num=5
str(num)
print(str(num)+"number")
{% endhighlight %}

abs() - Get absolute value of a number.

pow() - raise number to power, for example pow(3, 2)

max() - return largest number of all given

min() - return smallest number

round() - round number to the nearest integer

floor()

ceil()

sqrt() - Square root of a number

## Get User Input

input("Prompt Here")

Input function by default converts the input to a string data type.

When accepting numbers as input, they need to be converted into numbers.

int() - Convert to integer number

float() - Convert to decimal number

## Lists/Arrays

friends = \["Kevin", "Karen", "Jim"\]

Lists can take any value. Using square brackets creates a list. List index starts from 0. Using a negative value of the index, starts indexing from the end of the list starting with **-1**.

print(friends) - Print the List

print(friends\[0\]) - Print the first element in list.

\[1:\] - element at position 1 and everything that follows

\[1:3\] - a range of elements starting from 1 up to but not including 3.

### Using Functions with Lists

extend() - add a list to the end of another list. for example, two lists list1 and list2, list1.extend(list2)

append() - Append an element to the end of the list

insert() - Insert an element at a specific index in the list. example list1.insert(1, "value")

remove() - Remove element using it's value

clear() - remove all elements in list

pop() - Remove the last element from the list

index() - find index of element in a list, list1.index("value1")

count() - Count the number of repetitions for a value.

sort() - sort list in ascending order.

reverse() - Reverse list

copy() - create a new list as copy of a list, example, list2 = list1.copy()

## Tuples

coordinates=(4, 5)

Tuples are data structures containing multiple values. Tuples are created round parenthesis. A tuple is immutable, it cannot be changed/modified once it has been created. Tuples are index starting at position 0.

Elements inside a tuple can be accessed, but cannot be changed.

### Difference between Tuples and Lists

Tuples cannot be changed. Data that doesn't need to be changed is stored in tuples.

Tuples can be stored in lists like coordinates = \[(4,5), (6, 7), (8, 9)\]

## Functions

Function is a collection of code that performs a specific task.

Create a function with the keyword **def.**  The code inside a function must be indented. When there is no indention the code is considered out of the function.

Function needs to be called to execute it.

In python, it's good practice to use underscore in variables and function/names and all naming should be done in lowercase.

Parameter is a piece of information passed to a function.

{% highlight python %}
def say_hi(name):
    print("Hello"+name)
    
say_hi("Mike")
{% endhighlight %}

### Return Statement

Give a value back to the function call. When a variable is assigned to a function, the value returned by the function is stored in the variable. Any code inside a function that is written after the return statement is never executed.

## IF Statements

Execute code based on certain conditions.

If statements evaluate conditions based on true or false.

or --&gt; if any of the conditions are true.

and --&gt; if both of the conditions are true.

not() --&gt; negate the boolean value.

{% highlight python %}
is_male = True
is_tall = True
if is_male and is_tall:
	print("You are a tall male")
elif is_male and not(is_tall):
  	print("You are a short male")
elif not(is_male) and is_tall:
  	print("You are not a male but are tall")
else:
	print("You are neither male nor tall")
{% endhighlight %}

### Comparison Operators

{% highlight python %}
def max_num(num1, num2, num3):
  if num1 >= and num1 >= num3:
    return num1
  elif num2 >= num1 and num2 >= num3:
    return num2
  else:
  	return num3
print(max_num(3,4,5))
{% endhighlight %}

Equal - ==

Not Equal - !=

Can also you ***if var in "value"***

## Dictionaries

Dictionaries allow storing information in a **key-value pair.**

Dictionaries are created inside curly braces. All keys in a dictionary must be unique.

Dictionary values can be extracted using square brackets and the name of key, or by using the get function for the key. Using the get function, a default value can be assigned, the default value is returned in case there is no key.

{% highlight python %}
monthConversions = {
  "Jan": "January",
  "Feb": "February",
  "Mar": "March",
}
monthConversions = {
  0: "January",
  1: "February",
  2: "March",
}
print(monthConversions["Jan"])
print(monthConversions.get("Feb","Default Value"))
print(monthConversions[1])
{% endhighlight %}

## While Loop

Execute a block of code multiple times as long as a certain condition is true.

{% highlight python %}
i=1
while i <= 1:
  print(i)
  i+=1
print("Loop Finished")
{% endhighlight %}

## For Loop

Iterate over a collection.

Running for loop on a string takes each character as one variable.

{% highlight python %}
for letter in "Giraffe Academy":
  print(letter)
friends =["Jim", "Karen", "Kevin"]
for index in range(len(friends)):
  print(friends[index])
{% endhighlight %}

range() - specify range upto but not including a number. example, *range(10)* and *range(3,10)*

IF statements can be nested under for loops.

## 2D Arrays and Nested For Loops

In 2D lists/arrays, every element of a list is a list as well.

{% highlight python %}
number_grid = [
  [1,2,3],
  [4,5,6],
  [7,8,9],
  [0]
]

for row in number_grid:
  for column in row:
    print(column)
{% endhighlight %}

## Comments

Comment code using # or '''. Text between triple quotation marks can be written in multiple lines.

## Try and Except

Try and Except block is used to catch errors.

{% highlight python %}
try:
  number = int(input("Enter a number: "))
  print(number)
except:
  print("Invalid Input")
{% endhighlight %}

Use except block for different types of exceptions to handle the raised exceptions appropriately.

Types of Exceptions:

- ZeroDevisionError
- ValueError

Exception can be stored in a variable. Example

{% highlight python %}
except ZeroDivisionError as err:
  print(err)
{% endhighlight %}

Best practice in python is to except for a specific type of error.

## Reading Files

open(*filename,mode*) - Open a file. Filepath can be absolute or relative. Mode can be "r"-read, "w"-write,"a"-append,"r+"-Read and Write.

close()

To access file in Python, open it and store it in a variable. Whenever a file is opened it must be closed as well in the end.

{% highlight python %}
test_file=open("test.txt","r")
test_file.close()
{% endhighlight %}

readable() - Check if file is readable. Example. test\_file.readable()

read() - Read all the contents of file. Example, test\_file.read()

readline() - Read a line from the file and move cursor to the next line. Example, test\_file.readline()

readlines() - Put each line in a list. Each line is stored as an element in the array. Individual lines can be read by defining the array index. Example, test\_file.readlines()\[1\]

## Writing Files

write() - Write to file. Example, test\_file.write("Writing this line to file"). If mode is a, text will be written to the end of the file, if the mode is w, it will overwrite the existing file.

## Modules

A module is a python file that can be imported into the current file, and then use the functions available from the module.

Python external modules are stored int the lib folder.

Install external modules using **pip.** Pip is python package manager.

Modules installed using pip are place in the site-packages folder.

## Classes &amp; Objects

With classes and objects, we can create custom data types. A class is a data type.

 Inside a class, we can define different attributes.

{% highlight python %}
class Student:
  def __init__(self, name, major, gpa, is_on_probation):
    self.name = name
    self.major = major
    self.gpa = gpa
    self.is_on_probation = is_on_probation
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight python %}
from Student import Student
student1 = Student("Jim", "Business", 3.1, False)

print(student1.name)
{% endhighlight %}

An object stores the values assigned to a data type.

**from** selects the file, and **import** selects the class.

By using the "self" keyword we can access the attributes and methods of the class in python.

All classes have a function called \_\_init\_\_(), which is always executed when the class is being initiated. "\_\_init\_\_" is a reserved method in python classes. It is known as a constructor in object-oriented concepts. This method called when an object is created from the class and it allows the class to initialize the attributes of a class.

The `self` parameter is a reference to the current instance of the class and is used to access variables that belong to the class.

It does not have to be named `self` , you can call it whatever you like, but it has to be the first parameter of any function in the class.

### Class Functions

Methods in objects are functions that belong to the object.

## Inheritance

All the attributes and functions can be inherited into a child class. The functions of a child class will override the functions of the parent class if both the classes contain similarly named functions.

{% highlight python %}
from Chef import Chef
class ChineseChef(Chef):
  def make_special_dish(self);
  print("The chef makes orange chicken")
  def make_fried_rice(self):
    print("The chef makes fried rice")
{% endhighlight %}